Enhancing Node Reliability in Opportunistic
Networks through Blockchain Integration
Quang Huy Do†‡ , , Thiago Abreu† , Baah Kusi‡ , Nelly Chatue Diop‡ , Sami Souihi
†
† LISSI-TincNET

Research Team, University of Paris-Est Creteil, France
‡ Ejara lab, France
Email: huy.dq184271@sis.hust.edu.vn, thiago.abreu@u-pec.fr, baah.kusi@ejara.afri
ca, nelly@ejara
.io, sami.souihi@u-pec.fr
               and complex validation processes. To tackle the challenges
linked with third-party payment systems, using blockchain
[5] technology emerges as a game-changing solution. Unlike
centralized systems, blockchain operates in a decentralized manner, providing bu
ilt-in security
 without the need for extensive
               protective measures. This paper focuses on using blockchain
specifically to store essential network information, boosting the
reliability of nodes when handling peer-to-peer transactions.
The decentralized and unchangeable nature of blockchain
ensures secure storage of vital data, creating a foundation
for peer-to-peer transactions. By employing blockchain to
store network information, the system becomes more resilient
and transparent, effectively overcoming issues associated with
challenging environments and traditional payment methods.
In this paper, we present an integrated opportunistic network
with sharding-based blockchain [6]. Our proposed system
leverages using smart contracts [7] to store essential network
information to increase performance when finding optimal
I. I NTRODUCTION
routes for package transferring hence enhancing overall system
In the bustling markets across various regions of Africa,
performance.
where daily transactions are an important part of daily life,
• The first contribution is to propose the use of blockchain
there is a noticeable shift away from using physical cash.
in an opportunistic network environment, enhancing transThis shift is highlighte
d by the signif
icant adoption of mobile
               parency, security, and reliability in transaction processing
payments among internet users, with 84 percent in Kenya
and network operation.
and 60 percent in Nigeria opting for digital transactions in
• We propose a sharding-based blockchain designed to en2021 [1]. Additionally, s
everal African
governments actively
               hance throughput by distributing the workload across mulencourage
 the use of mobile payments, e
specially considering
               tiple shards. This approach also simplifies management,
the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic [2]. This
making it easier to handle and enhance the throughput of
reflects a growing reliance on digital financial solutions. Beyond
the blockchain system.
just offering convenience, these mobile payments also play a
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
crucial role in promoting financial inclusion. This is particularly
provides background work on blockchain, sharding, smart
important in areas where a significant part of the population
contracts, and opportunistic networks. Section III provides
doesn’t have access to traditional banking services.
Despite the progress made in digital transactions, the need an overview of our p
roposed system
and states the problem.
               for a stable internet connection poses a significant challenge, T
he performance analysis for sh
arding-based blockchain with
               particularly in areas like traditional marketplaces with limited
opportunistic networks is pres
ented in Sec. IV. Finally, Section
               or sporadic network access [3]. To tackle this challenge, V concl
udes the paper and highlights
our future work.
               opportunistic networking [4] offers a promising solution. It
II. BACKGROUND
relies on direct device-to-device (D2D) communication to
enable secure and efficient transactions on mobile phones, A. Blockchain
Blockchain [5] is a decentralized digital ledger technology
even when there is no reliable internet connection available.
that
was originally developed to support the cryptocurrency
This approach is especially beneficial in regions where network
Bitcoin.
The core idea of blockchain is decentralization, which
conditions are unpredictable, meeting the growing demand for
means
that
it does not store any of its databases in a central
mobile payments in such areas.
Another challenge in current digital payment is that it relies location. Instead
, the blockchai
n is copied and spread across
               on third-party payment systems, which often involve extra fees a
network of participants (i.e.
computers). Whenever a new
               Abstract—In challenging environments or low network resource
areas, peer-to-peer payments face significant hurdles due to
unreliable connectivity and limited infrastructure. Leveraging
the integration of opportunistic networks and blockchain, this
paper presents a novel approach to enhance node reliability
and ensure transparency in transaction processing even in areas
with limited network conditions. This method aims to ensure the
resilience and efficiency of opportunistic network by integrating
a sharding-based blockchain technology. Our approach securely
stores essential network information and transaction data on the
blockchain to foster a trustworthy and transparent transactional
environment. We also apply sharding-based blockchain to increase
network throughput and manageability. Integration of blockchain
and opportunistic networks addresses the challenges of peer-topeer payments, est
ablishes tamper
-proof data, enhances node
               reliability, and provides transparency in collaborative decisionm
aking within the network.
Index Terms—Opportunistic Networks, Blockchain, Smart
Contract, Reliability, Security, Transparency.


block is added to the blockchain, every computer on the
network updates its blockchain to reflect the change. This
decentralized architecture ensures robust and secure operations
on the blockchain with the advantages of tamper resistance
and no single-point failure vulnerabilities, which improves
efficiency in domains requiring a high level of transparency
and data privacy like the 5G network.

opportunistic network environment is structured into two key
layers: the controller layer and the infrastructure layer.
The infrastructure layer comprises network nodes that are
strategically organized into groups, creating more manageable
subsets known as shards. This partitioning strategy is implemented to significan
tly boost netwo
rk throughput, allowing for
               parallelized processing and improved scalability. By dividing
the network into shards, we enhance the efficiency of data
B. Sharding
processing and resource utilization.
Sharding, according to related work, [8] [6], is one of the
On top of the infrastructure layer, we introduce the controller
most promising solutions for the scalability problem. Originally, layer, which c
onsists of seve
ral distributed controllers. Each
               sharding [9] is a type of database partitioning technique that co
ntroller is responsible for ma
naging and processing network
               separates a huge database into much smaller, faster, more easily
information within its assigne
d shard. Essential network informanaged parts called data shards. The key idea o
f sharding in mation includes distances between nodes, position, range, and
                              the blockchain is to split the network into smalle
r committees. status of each node, etc. This
decentralized approach ensures
               Each can independently process a disjoint set of transactions tha
t controllers operate independ
ently, acquiring and updating
               (or a “shard”). With sharding, nodes only have to communicate net
work data autonomously.
with nodes within its shard and only store the transactions
Our system model uses smart contracts to store essential
happening in its shard.
network information. This integration enhances both node
reliability and transparency. Each controller monitors and
C. Smart Contract
securely records pertinent network data through smart contracts,
Smart contracts, operating on blockchain technology, enensuring that critical in
formation is im
mutably stored on the
               hance transparency and security for opportunistic networks
blockchain. This proactive approach fortifies the reliability of
by automating agreements and ensuring trust among parties.
nodes in handling various transactions and introduces a layer
These contracts, visible to authorized users on blockchains,
of transparency to the network’s operations.
offer transparency through their immutable and visible source
To address the issue of unreliable connectivity, our system
code [7]. By transferring digital trust inherent in blockchain leverages the opp
ortunistic netw
ork’s inherent capability to
               transactions to complex agreements, smart contracts enable utiliz
e direct D2D communication. In
 scenarios where nodes
               secure interactions even in unstable network conditions where exp
erience intermittent connectiv
ity, the system relies on
               paths may change rapidly. Additionally, the automation and interm
ediate nodes to relay transact
ion data to controllers. The
               enforcement capabilities of smart contracts contribute to im- con
trollers, having relatively be
tter connectivity and resources,
               proved efficiency, traceability, and security within opportunisti
c manage the communication wit
h the blockchain network.
               networks, aligning with the need for reliable communication This
method ensures that even in ch
allenging environments,
               in unpredictable environments
transaction data can eventually be synchronized with the
D. Opportunistic Network
blockchain once a stable connection is available.
Opportunistic networks, characterized by their dynamic and
2) Sharding-based Blockchain: The blockchain architecture
self-organizing nature, operate on temporary connections rather
is implemented using a sharding approach to address the
than fixed routes [4], enabling data exchange in challenging
scalability challenges commonly associated with blockchain
conditions like sparse infrastructure or variable topologies.
technology. In our sharding-based blockchain system, the
These networks leverage intermittent connectivity among
infrastructure layer is divided into multiple shards, each
nodes, allowing communication even without direct pathways
corresponding to a small region within the Opportunistic
through the assistance of intermediate nodes. By utilizing
Network, as shown in Fig. ??. Each shard is managed by a
idle bandwidth and epidemic routing algorithms, opportunistic
distinct controller within the controller layer. This partitioning
networks offer benefits such as cost reduction, support for
strategy significantly enhances network throughput, allowing
low-latency applications, and improved resource utilization.
for parallelized processing and improved scalability. The deAdditionally, these
networks addres
s the need for communicacentralized nature of sharding-based blockchain ensures
robust         tion in highly unpredictable environments by adapting to the
and secure operations with the advantages of tamper resistance
unstable topology and intermittent connections present in such
and no single-point failure vulnerabilities. The integration
scenarios.
of sharding-based blockchain with Opportunistic Networks
III. S MART C ONTRACT I NTEGRATION W ITH
leverages the advantages of both technologies. By aligning each
O PPORTUNISTIC N ETWORK
shard with a specific region in the Opportunistic Network, the
A. System Overview
system becomes easier to manage and monitor. Each controller
1) System Model: In our innovative approach to Smart in the controller layer is
responsible for
 managing and securely
               Contract Integration with Opportunistic Networks, we introduce re
cording pertinent network data
 through smart contracts,
               a dynamic system model aimed at enhancing efficiency and ensuring
 that critical information is
immutably stored on the
               transparency within the network, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The bl
ockchain. This proactive appro
ach fortifies the reliability of

Fig. 1: Proposal design
nodes in handling various transactions and introduces a layer
of transparency to the network’s operations.

gies should be devised to foster a secure and transparent
environment, establishing trust in data transactions.

IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
B. Problem statement
1) Performance:
• Optimal Routing Efficiency: Utilize smart contracts to
optimize the routing path within opportunistic network,
enabling nodes to dynamically identify and adapt to the
most efficient routing paths despite intermittent connectivity, thus minimizing
delays and ensu
ring timely message
               delivery.
• Resource management: Efficient resource allocation
within opportunistic network requires addressing the
limited storage, processing power, and battery life of
individual nodes. The problem statement involves optimizing strategies that effe
ctively utilize
 these constrained
               resources while maintaining network performance.
• Efficient Transaction Handling: Utilize opportunistic
network to handle peer-to-peer transactions in challengFig. 2: Impact or Network
 Size in Route
Finding
               ing environments by integrating blockchain technology.
The decentralized nature of blockchain ensures secure
and efficient transaction processing, fostering a reliable A. Experiment setup
environment for peer-to-peer transactions.
In this section, we analyze the performance of our proposed
2) Security and Transparency:
system using smart contracts and compare the metrics of
• Increased Security and Availability in Challenging En- our proposed platform w
ith the system
without using smart
               vironments: Utilize blockchain technology to enhance the contract
s in two scenarios: ideal envi
ronment and real-world
               security and availability of nodes in opportunistic network, envi
ronment with the inconsistent
model. In ideal environment,
               particularly in dynamic and unpredictable connectivity all nodes
are online and function normal
ly all the time.
               scenarios. Strategies should be devised to mitigate dis- Whereas
inconsistent model for real-wo
rld environment refers
               ruptions, enhance node availability, and maintain network to case
s in real-world scenarios wher
e not all nodes in an
               functionality in challenging environments.
opportunistic network are consistently available due to various
• Transparency and Trust: Implement mechanisms that
factors like power constraints, hardware failures, and node
leverage blockchain technology with smart contracts to mobility. We define the n
odes that are u
nstable as inconsistent
               guarantee transparent communication and decision-making nodes. To
 simulate this inconsistency,
we introduced a model
               processes among nodes in opportunistic network. Strate- where a c
ertain percentage of nodes in
the network are

Parameter

Value

The number of blockchain shards

3

The initial number of nodes

9

The maximum number of nodes

36

The initial number of inconsistent
nodes

1

The maximum number of
inconsistent nodes

10

Propagation Model

logDistance, exp=4.5

Network Type

adhoc

Mobility Model

Random Direction

TABLE I: Simulation Parameters

b) Performance in Inconsistent Environment: Fig. 3
illustrates the impact of node inconsistency on the optimal
route-finding process. As shown, even in an environment with
inconsistent nodes, the use of smart contracts still outperforms
the traditional method in terms of route-finding efficiency.
Each shard’s controller pushes the status of each node in realtime to smart cont
racts so that w
hen determining the optimal
               route from source to destination, nodes don’t have to check
if neighbor nodes are up or not. As a result, the performance
gain when using smart contracts compared to not using them
becomes increasingly significant as the number of nodes in the
network increases. Specifically, when there are 36 nodes, the
performance improvement with smart contracts reaches up to
250% compared to the traditional method.

offline at a certain time interval. This model allows us to
evaluate the robustness of our system in a more realistic
and challenging environment. We used Mininet-Wifi [10] to
deploy an opportunistic network and Tezos-k8s [11] to deploy
Tezos blockchain infrastructure on a Kubernetes [12] cluster
for testing. Besides, we use PyTezos [13] to handle contract
interaction with Python 3.11 and Ubuntu 20.04. The parameters
setting used in the simulations is summarized in Table I.
B. Results and Analysis
1) Performance: In our experiment, we set up to calculate
the time it takes for a node to find the optimal route from itself
to the destination node in two scenarios: ideal environment
and real-world environment with inconsistent model.
a) Performance in Ideal Environment: Fig. 2 shows
the superior performance of our proposed scheme using
smart contracts compared to that when not using ones. In
a system not using smart contracts, the process of finding
the optimal route from the source to the destination node
involves nodes repeatedly searching for the shortest neighbor
node and checking if that node is the destination node. In this
process, each node has to ping and check the distance between
itself and the neighbor, as well as its coverage area. However,
with the integration of smart contracts, we have a controller
responsible for pushing all the necessary information, such
as distance and coverage area, to the smart contract. As a
result, when finding the optimal route, nodes no longer need
to ping each other, significantly reducing the computational
overhead and enhancing the efficiency of the route-finding
process. Specifically, when the number of nodes in our platform
reaches 36, the performance enhancement due to the smart
contract integration becomes particularly evident. At this scale,
the time to find a route when using smart contracts improves
by approximately 300% compared to the system without smart
contracts. However, with a smaller number of nodes, specifically
9, the performance of the system not using smart contracts
is slightly better. This is because, with a smaller node count,
fetching information from the smart contract takes longer than
the traditional ping method, leading to a slight delay in route
determination.

Fig. 3: Impact or Network Size in Route Finding in Inconsistent
Environment
2) Security:
a) Transparency and Trust: One of the key advantages
of integrating smart contracts with opportunistic networks is
the enhanced transparency and trust in data transactions. In
traditional systems, nodes often rely on centralized mechanisms
to verify the correctness of stored data. However, with the
introduction of smart contracts on the blockchain, each node can
independently verify the integrity and correctness of the data
stored on the blockchain. This decentralized verification process
eliminates the need for third-party validation and ensures that
the data is tamper-proof and immutable. This enhances the
overall trustworthiness of the system and provides a transparent
mechanism for data verification. In scenarios where the network
consists of nodes with inconsistent status or where the network
size is large, this feature becomes particularly beneficial. It
allows the network to maintain a high level of data integrity
and reliability, even in challenging environments.
b) Increased Security and Availability in Challenging
Environments: Fig. 4 illustrates the impact of node inconsistency on the node-st
atus checking i
n an environment where
               nodes frequently switch between online and offline states. As
demonstrated, even in a network with inconsistent node statuses,
the utilization of smart contracts enhances the efficiency of the
node status-checking process.
When the network comprises a small number of nodes, the
traditional method, where nodes have to ping each other to

check if a node is offline or online, performs better than the
smart contract approach. However, as the number of nodes in
the network grows, the performance advantage of using smart
contracts becomes increasingly significant. In detail, when
there are 36 nodes, the performance improvement with smart
contracts reaches up to 175% compared to the method without
smart contracts.

The introduction of a sharding-based blockchain designed
to enhance throughput by distributing the workload across
multiple shards, making the system easier to manage.
While our approach shows promising results, there are still
challenges and limitations to address, such as scalability issues,
security concerns, and adaptability to dynamic environments.
Future work will focus on addressing these challenges and
further optimizing the proposed system to meet the evolving
requirements of opportunistic networks in the 5G era.
•

R EFERENCES

Fig. 4: Impact or Network Size in Checking Node Status In
Inconsistent Environment

C. Challenges and Limitations
While our proposed sharding-based blockchain in an opportunistic network environ
ment offers sig
nificant advantages
               in terms of transparency, security, and reliability, it also
presents several challenges and limitations. As the number
of transactions and nodes in the network increases, managing
and maintaining the blockchain can become more complex.
Although sharding helps to distribute the workload, it may also
introduce challenges related to cross-shard transactions and
synchronization. Additionally, while blockchain technology
inherently provides security through its decentralized and
tamper-resistant nature, the integration with opportunistic
networks may introduce vulnerabilities. Ensuring the security
of the network against various attacks remains a challenge.
Furthermore, utilizing opportunistic networks with limited
resource devices can be challenging, especially in meeting
the real-time requirements for peer-to-peer payments.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a novel approach to enhance
transparency, security, and reliability for nodes in opportunistic network envir
onments by inte
grating a sharding-based
               blockchain system. Our proposed system leverages the benefits
of blockchain technology to store essential network information,
thereby improving the overall performance of the network.
The main contributions of this paper include:
• The proposal to use blockchain in an opportunistic
network environment to enhance transparency, security,
and reliability in transaction processing and network
operation.

[1] M. . Company, “The future of payments in africa,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/ourinsights/th
e-future-of-pay
ments-in-africa
               [2] G. F. Magazine. (2023) Africa: Digital payments progress. Glo
bal
Finance Magazine. [Online]. Available: https://gfmag.com/features/africadigital-
payments-progre
ss
               [3] M. Singh, P. Verma, and A. Verma, “Security in opportunistic
networks,”
in Opportunistic networks. CRC Press, 2021, pp. 299–312.
[4] A.- Manole, R.-I. Ciobanu, C. Dobre, and R. Purnichescu-Purtan,
“Opportunistic network algorithms for internet traffic offloading in music
festival scenarios,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 10, p. 3315, 2021.
[5] H. Yang, Y. Liang, Q. Yao, S. Guo, A. Yu, and J. Zhang, “Blockchainbased sec
ure distributed
 control for software defined optical networking,”
               China Communications, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 42–54, 2019.
[6] H. Nam Nguyen, H. Anh Tran, S. Fowler, and S. Souihi, “A survey of
blockchain technologies applied to software-defined networking: Research
challenges and solutions,” IET Wireless Sensor Systems, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 233–247, 2021.
[7] P. Bottoni, N. Gessa, G. Massa, R. Pareschi, H. Selim, and E. Arcuri,
“Intelligent smart contracts for innovative supply chain management,”
Frontiers in Blockchain, vol. 3, p. 52, 2020.
[8] A. Hafid, A. S. Hafid, and M. Samih, “Scaling blockchains: A comprehensive s
urvey,” IEEE Ac
cess, vol. 8, pp. 125 244–125 262, 2020.
               [9] G. Wang, Z. J. Shi, M. Nixon, and S. Han, “Sok: Sharding on b
lockchain,”
in Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference on Advances in Financial
Technologies, 2019, pp. 41–61.
[10] R. R. Fontes, S. Afzal, S. H. Brito, M. A. Santos, and C. E. Rothenberg,
“Mininet-wifi: Emulating software-defined wireless networks,” in 2015
11th International Conference on Network and Service Management
(CNSM). IEEE, 2015, pp. 384–389.
[11] O. Alpha. Tezos-k8s. Oxhead Alpha, Inc. [Online]. Available:
https://tezos-k8s.io/
[12] T. Kubernetes, “Kubernetes,” Kubernetes. Retrieved May, vol. 24, p.
2019, 2019.
[13] B. Bad. Pytezos. Baking Bad. [Online]. Available: https://pytezos.org/